<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Two narrow escapes⁠—Arrival at Etah⁠—Harry Whitney⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook’s claims.</p>
			</header>
			<p>From Karnah the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> sailed to Itiblu, where hunting-parties secured thirty-one walrus and one seal. By the 11th of August we had reached the northern shore of Northumberland Island, where we were delayed by storm. It was shortly before noon of this day that we barely escaped another fatal calamity.</p>
			<p>Chief Wardwell, while cleaning the rifle of Commander Peary, had the misfortune to have the piece explode while in his hands. From some unknown cause a cartridge was discharged, the projectile pierced two thick partitions of inch-and-a-half pine, and penetrated the cabin occupied by Professor MacMillan and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borup. The billet of that bullet was the shoulder and forearm of Professor MacMillan, who at the time was sound asleep in his berth. He had been lying with his arm doubled and his head resting on his hand. A half inch nearer and the bullet would have entered his brain.</p>
			<p>As is always the case with narrow escapes, I, too, had a narrow escape, for that same bullet entered the partition on its death-dealing mission at identically the same spot where a few minutes previously <em>my</em> head had rested. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goodsell was quickly aroused, he attended Professor MacMillan, and in a short time he diagnosed the case as a “gunshot wound.” Finding no bones broken, or veins or arteries open, he soon had the Professor bandaged and comfortable.</p>
			<p>At the time of the accident to Professor MacMillan the ship was riding at anchor, but with insufficient slack-way, so in the afternoon, when the excitement had somewhat abated, Captain Bob decided to give the ship more chain, for a storm was imminent, and he gave the order accordingly. The boatswain, in his haste to execute the order, and overestimating the amount of chain in the locker, permitted all of it to run overboard. We were in a predicament, with the storm upon us, no anchor to hold the boat, and a savage, rocky shore on which we were in danger of being wrecked. There was a small five-hundred-pound anchor with a nine-inch cable of about one hundred and fifty fathoms remaining, which was repeatedly tried, but the ship was too much for this featherweight anchor, and dragged it at will. Commander Peary, with his usual foresight, had ordered steam as soon as the approach of the storm was noticed, and now that the steam was up, he ordered that the ship be kept head-on, and steam up and down the coast until the storm abated. The storm lasted until the night of August 13, and the best part of the following day was spent by two boat-crews of twelve men, in grappling for the lost anchor and chain, and not until they had secured it and restored it once more to its locker were they permitted to rest. With the anchor secure, walrus-hunting commenced afresh, and on the ice-floes between Hakluyt and Northumberland Islands thirty more walrus were secured.</p>
			<p>On August 16, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> steamed back to Karnah, and the Eskimo people who intended living there for the following winter were landed. A very large supply of meat was landed also; in addition to the meat quite a number of useful presents, hatchets, knives, needles, some boards for the making and repairing of sledges, and some wood for lance-and harpoon-staves, and a box full of soap were landed. This inventory of presents may seem cheap and paltry to you, but to these natives such presents as we made were more appreciated than the gift of many dollars would be by a poverty-stricken family in this country. With the materials that Commander Peary furnished would be made the weapons of the chase, the tools of the seamstress, and the implements of the homemaker. The Eskimos have always known how to utilize every factor furnished by nature, and what has been given to them by the Commander has been given with the simple idea of helping them to make their life easier, and proves again the axiom, “The Lord helps those who help themselves.”</p>
			<p>After disembarking the Karnah contingent, the ship steamed to Etah, arriving there on the afternoon of August 17. As the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> was entering the harbor of Etah, all hands were on deck and on the lookout, for it was here that we were again to come in touch with the world we had left behind a year before. A large number of Eskimos were running up and down the shore, but there was no sign of the expected ship. Quickly a boat was lowered, and I saw to it that I was a member of the crew of that boat, and when we reached the beach the first person to greet me was old Panikpah, greasy, smiling, and happy as if I were his own son. I quickly recognized my old friend Pooadloonah, who greeted me with a merry laugh, and my misgivings as to the fate of this precious pair were dispelled. If you will remember, Panikpah and Pooadloonah were the two Eskimos who found, when on our Poleward journey, just about the time we had struck the “Big Lead,” that there were a couple of fox-traps, or something like that, that they had forgotten to attend to, and that it was extremely necessary for them to go back and square up their accounts. Here they were, fat, smiling, and healthy; and I apprehend somewhat surprised to see us, but they bluffed it out well.</p>
			<p>Murphy and the young man Pritchard were also here. Murphy and Pritchard were the members of the crew who had been left here to guard the provisions of the expedition, and to trade with the Eskimos. Another person also was there to greet us; but who had kept himself alive and well by his own pluck and clear grit, and who reported on meeting the Commander of having had a most satisfactory and enjoyable experience. I refer to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harry Whitney, the young man from New Haven, Conn., who had elected at the last hour, the previous autumn, to remain at Etah, to hunt the big game of the region. When the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> had sailed north from Etah, the previous August, he had been left absolutely alone; the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Erik</i> had sailed for home, and there was no way out of this desolate land for him until the relief ship came north the following year, or the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> came south to take him aboard. His outfit and equipment were sufficient for him and complete, but he had shared it with the natives until it was exhausted, and after that he had reverted to the life of the aborigines. When the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> reached Etah, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney was an Eskimo; but within one hour, he had a bath, a shave, and a haircut, and was the same mild-mannered gentleman that we had left there in the fall. He had gratified his ambitions in shooting musk-oxen, but he had not killed a single polar bear.</p>
			<p>At Etah there were two boys, Etookahshoo and Ahpellah, boys about sixteen or seventeen years old, who had been with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook for a year, or ever since he had crossed the channel to Ellesmere Land and returned again. These boys are the two he claims accompanied him to the North Pole. To us, up there at Etah, such a story was so ridiculous and absurd that we simply laughed at it. We knew <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook and his abilities; he had been the surgeon on two of Peary’s expeditions and, aside from his medical ability, we had no faith in him whatever. He was not even good for a day’s work, and the idea of his making such an astounding claim as having reached the Pole was so ludicrous that, after our laugh, we dropped the matter altogether.</p>
			<p>On account of the worldwide controversy his story has caused, I will quote from my diary the impressions noted in regard to him:</p>
			<p>“August 17, 1909, Etah, North Greenland.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harry Whitney came aboard with the boatswain and the cabin-boy, who had been left here last fall on our way to Cape Sheridan. Murphy is the boatswain and Pritchard the boy, both from Newfoundland, and they look none the worse for wear, in spite of the long time they have spent here. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney is the gentleman who came up on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Erik</i> last year, and at the last moment decided to spend the winter with the natives. He had a long talk with the Commander before we left for the north, and has had quite a lengthy session with him since. I learn that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook came over from Ellesmere Land with his two boys, Etookahshoo and Ahpellah, and in a confidential conversation with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney made the statement that he had reached the North Pole. Professor MacMillan and I have talked to his two boys and have learned that there is no foundation in fact for such a statement, and the Captain and others of the expedition have questioned them, and if they were out on the ice of the Arctic Ocean it was only for a very short distance, not more than twenty or twenty-five miles. The boys are positive in this statement, and my own boys, Ootah and Ooqueah, have talked to them also, and get the same replies. It is a fact that they had a very hard time and were reduced to low limits, but they have not been any distance north, and the Commander and the rest of us are in the humor to regard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney as a person who has been hoodwinked. We know <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook very well and also his reputation, and we know that he was never good for a hard day’s work; in fact he was not up to the average, and he is no hand at all in making the most of his resources. He probably has spun this yarn to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney and the boatswain to make himself look big to them.</p>
			<p>“The Commander will not permit <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney to bring any of the <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook effects aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> and they have been left in a cache on shore. Koolootingwah is here again, after his trip to North Star Bay with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook, and tells an amusing story of his experience.”</p>
			<p>It is only from a sense of justice to Commander Peary and those who were with him that I have mentioned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook. The outfitting of the hunting expedition of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bradley was well known to us. Captain Bartlett had directed it and had advised and arranged for the purchase of the Schooner <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">John <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Bradley</i> to carry the hunting party to the region where big game of the character <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bradley wished to hunt could be found. We knew that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook was accompanying <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bradley, but we had no idea that the question of the discovery of the North Pole was to be involved.</p>
			<p>I have reason to be grateful to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cook for favors received; I lived with his folks while I was suffering with my eyes, due to snow blindness, but I feel that all of the debts of gratitude have been liquidated by my silence in this controversy, and I will have nothing more to say in regard to him or to his claims.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
