<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Etah to New York⁠—Coming of mail and reporters⁠—Home!</p>
			</header>
			<p>At Etah we expected to meet the relief ship. Sixty tons of coal and a small quantity of provisions had been left there during the previous summer, to be used by us on our homeward voyage. This coal was loaded on board and the Eskimos who desired to remain at Etah were landed. Just at the time we were ready to sail a heavy storm of wind and snow blew up, and it was not until six <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> on the 20th that we left the harbor. Farewells had been said to the Eskimos, all that had been promised them for faithful services had been given to them, and we commenced the final stage of our journey home.</p>
			<p>From Etah, August 20, the ship sailed along the coast, landing Eskimos at the different settlements, and on the 23rd of August at two <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, we met the Schooner <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Jeanie</i>, of <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <abbr class="postal">NF</abbr>, commanded by Samuel Bartlett. The schooner was supplied with provisions and coal for the relief of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>, and was executing the plan of the Peary Arctic Club.</p>
			<p>There was mail aboard her and we had our first tidings of home and friends in a twelvemonth. From newspaper clippings I learned that the British Antarctic Expedition, commanded by Sir Ernest <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Shackleton, had reached within 111 miles of the South Pole.</p>
			<p>The mail contained good news for all but one of us. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borup, in his bunk above the Professor’s, read his letters, and in the course of his reading was heard to emit a deep sigh, then to utter an agonizing groan. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> MacMillan, thinking that Borup had received bad news indeed, endeavored to console him, and at the same time asked what was the bad news, feeling sure it could be nothing less than the death of Colonel Borup or some other close relative of his.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter, George? Tell me.”</p>
			<p>“<strong>Harvard beat Yale!</strong>”</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>, accompanied by her consort, sailed south to North Star Bay and while entering the harbor ran ashore. Late in the afternoon, however, the rising tide floated her. While waiting for the tide, a party of six, I among the number, went ashore and visited the Danish Missionary settlement established there, the Eskimos acting as our interpreters, we being unable to speak Danish and the missionaries being unable to speak English. It was in North Star Bay that the coal and provisions from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Jeanie</i> were transferred to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>.</p>
			<p>Aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Jeanie</i>, there was a young Eskimo man, Mene, who for the past twelve years had lived in New York City, but, overcome by a strong desire to live again in his own country, had been sent north by his friends in the States. He was almost destitute, having positively nothing in the way of an equipment to enable him to withstand the rigors of the country, and was no more fitted for the life he was to take up than any boy of eighteen or twenty would be, for he was but a little boy when he first left North Greenland. However, Commander Peary ordered that he be given a plentiful supply of furs to keep him warm, food, ammunition and loading outfit, traps and guns, but, I believe, he would have gladly returned with us, for it was a wistful farewell he made, and an Eskimo’s farewell is usually very barren of pathos.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney transferred his augmented equipment to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Jeanie</i>, intending to remain with her down the Labrador, for her Captain had agreed to use every effort to help <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitney secure at least one polar bear.</p>
			<p>Cape York was reached on the morning of August 25, and from the two Eskimo families, living at the extreme point of the Cape, we obtained the mail which had been left there by Captain Adams of the Dundee Whaling Fleet <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Morning Star</i>. Our letters, although they bore no more recent a date than that of March 23, 1909, were eagerly read.</p>
			<p>At Cape York we landed the last of the Eskimos. The decks were now cleared. The boats were securely lashed in their davits, and nine <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr>, August 26, in a gale of wind, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> put out to sea, homeward-bound, but not yet out of danger, for the gale increased so considerably that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> was forced to lay to under reefed foresail, in the lee of the middle pack, until the 29th, when the storm subsided and the ship got under way again.</p>
			<p>On September 4 the Labrador was sighted. Under full steam we passed the Farmyard, a group of small islands which lie off the coast.</p>
			<p>We arrived at Turnavik at seven-thirty <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> Once again we saw signs of civilization. The men and women appeared in costumes of the Twentieth Century instead of the fur garments of the Eskimos. Here we loaded nineteen tons of coal. Here we feasted on fresh codfish, fresh vegetables, and other appetizing foods to which our palates had long been strangers.</p>
			<p>You know the rest, for from Turnavik to Indian Harbor was only a few hours’ sailing.</p>
			<p>At Indian Harbor was located the wireless telegraph station from where Commander Peary flashed to the civilized world his laconic message, “Stars and Stripes nailed to the North Pole.”</p>
			<p>Within half an hour of our arrival, the British cutter <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Fiona</i> entered the harbor and the officers came aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>. Thereafter for every hour there was continuous excitement and reception of visitors.</p>
			<p>On September 13th the steamer <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Douglas <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Thomas</i>, of Sydney, <abbr class="initialism">C.B.</abbr>, arrived, having on board two representatives of the Associated Press, accompanied by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rood, a representative of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Harper’s Magazine</i>.</p>
			<p>The next day the cable-boat <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Tyrian</i> arrived, with seventeen newspaper reporters, five photographers, and one stenographer. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Tyrian</i> anchored outside the harbor and in five lifeboats the party was brought aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>. As they rowed they cheered, and when they sighted Commander Peary three ringing cheers and a tiger were given. The newspaper men requested an interview with the Commander. He granted their request, at the same time suggesting that they accompany him ashore to a fish-loft at the end of the pier, where there would be more room than aboard the ship. Accompanied by the members of the expedition, the Commander and the reporters left the ship. Arriving at the loft Commander Peary sat on some fishnets at the rear end of the loft, some of the reporters sat on barrels and nets, others squatted on the floor. They formed a semicircle around him and eagerly listened to the first telling of his stirring story.</p>
			<p>Before leaving Battle Harbor, we received a visit from the great missionary, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Grenfell, the effect of whose presence was almost like a benediction.</p>
			<p>On the morning of the 18th we left Battle Harbor accompanied by the tug <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Douglas <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Thomas</i>, amidst the salutes of the many vessels and boats in the harbor and the cannon on the hill.</p>
			<p>Through the Straits of Belle Isle we steamed, with a fair wind and a choppy sea. In the meantime I was busily engaged in making a strip to sew upon a large American flag. This was a broad white bar which was to extend from the upper right to the lower left corner of the flag, with the words “North Pole” sewed on it.</p>
			<p>About six <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> on the 21st, a large white, steam-yacht was seen approaching, flying an American flag from her foremast and the English flag from the mizzenmast. We were close enough to her to distinguish <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Peary and the children on board. A boat was quickly lowered from the yacht and the Peary family was soon united aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>.</p>
			<p>All kinds of sailing craft now met the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> and by them she was escorted into the harbor of Sydney, <abbr class="initialism eoc">C.B.</abbr> Whistles were blown, thousands of people lined the shores of the harbor, cheering enthusiastically and waving flags, and as the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> was moored alongside the pier, a delegation of schoolgirls met the Commander, made an address, and presented him with a magnificent bouquet. The streets were gorgeously decorated and a holiday had been declared. A ripe, royal welcome was accorded the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> and the members of the expedition. Visitors boarded the ship and looted successfully for souvenirs.</p>
			<p>It was at Sydney that the expedition commenced to disband. Commander Peary and his family returned to the United States via railroad-train.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> left Sydney on September 22 for New York City. A stop was made at Eagle Island, in Casco Bay, off the coast of Maine, where is located the summer home of Commander Peary, and here we landed most of his paraphernalia, some sledges and dogs. From Eagle Island we steamed direct to Sandy Hook, reaching there at noon on October 2. The next day the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> took her place with the replica of those two historic ships, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Half Moon</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Clermont</i>, in the lead of the great naval parade.</p>
			<p>And now my story is ended; it is a tale that is told. “Now is Othello’s occupation gone.”</p>
			<p>I long to see them all again! the brave, cheery companions of the trail of the North. I long to see again the lithe figure of my Commander! and to hear again his clear, ringing voice urging and encouraging me onward, with his “Well done, my boy.” I want to be with the party when they reach the untrod shores of Crocker Land; I yearn to be with those who reach the South Pole, the lure of the Arctic is tugging at my heart, to me the trail is calling!</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“The Old Trail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trail that is always New!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
