<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">After musk-oxen⁠—The doctor’s scientific expedition.</p>
			</header>
			<p>From the time of my arrival at the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>, for nearly three weeks, my days were spent in complete idleness. I would catch a fleeting glimpse of Commander Peary, but not once in all of that time did he speak a word to me. Then he spoke to me in the most ordinary matter-of-fact way, and ordered me to get to work. Not a word about the North Pole or anything connected with it; simply, “There is enough wood left, and I would like to have you make a couple of sledges and mend the broken ones. I hope you are feeling all right.” There was enough wood left and I made three sledges, as well as repaired those that were broken.</p>
			<p>The Commander was still running things and he remained the commander to the last minute; nothing escaped him, and when the time came to slowdown on provisions, he gave the orders, and we had but two spare meals a day to sustain us. The whole expedition lived on travel rations from before the time we left Cape Sheridan until we had reached Sydney, <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">NS</abbr>, and like the keen-fanged hounds, we were always ready and fit.</p>
			<p>It was late in May when <abbr>Prof.</abbr> MacMillan and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borup, with their Eskimo companions returned from Cape Jesup, where they had been doing highly important scientific work, taking soundings out on the sea-ice north of the cape as high as 84° 15′ north, and also at the cape. They had made a trip that was record-breaking; they had visited the different cairns made by Lockwood and Brainard and by Commander Peary, and they had also captured and brought into the ship a musk-ox calf; and they had most satisfactorily demonstrated their fitness as Arctic explorers, having followed the Commander’s orders implicitly and secured more than the required number of tidal-readings and soundings.</p>
			<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> MacMillan, with Jack Barnes, a sailor, and Kudlooktoo, left for Fort Conger early in June, and continued the work of tidal-observations. They rejoined the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> just before she left Cape Sheridan. A little later in the month, Borup went to Clements Markham Inlet to hunt musk-oxen, and from there he went to Cape Columbia, where he erected the cairn containing the record of the last and successful expedition of the “Peary Arctic Club.” The cairn was a substantial pile of rocks, surmounted by a strong oaken guidepost, with arms pointing “North 413 miles to the Pole”; “East, to Cape Morris <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Jesup, 275 miles”; “West to Cape Thomas <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hubbard, 225 miles”; while the southern arm pointed south, but to no particular geographical spot; it was labeled “Cape Columbia.” Underneath the arms of the guidepost, which had been made by Mate Gushue, was a small, glass-covered, boxlike arrangement, in which was encased the record of Peary’s successful journey to the Pole, and the roster of the expedition, my name included. From the crossbars, guys of galvanized wire were stretched and secured to heavy rocks, to help sustain the monument from the fury of the storms. Borup did good work, photographed the result, and the picture of the cairn, when exhibited, proved very satisfactory to the Commander.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goodsell with two teams, and the Eskimo men, Keshungwah and Tawchingwah, left the ship on May 27, to hunt in the Lake Hazen and Ruggles River regions. They were successful in securing thirteen musk-oxen in that neighborhood, and in Bellows Valley they shot a number of the “Peary” caribou, the species “<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Rangifer Pearyi</i>,” a distinct class of reindeer inhabiting that region.</p>
			<p>On the return of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goodsell, he told of his fascinating experiences in that wonderland. Leaving the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>, he had turned inland at Black Cliff Bay. Past the glaciers he went with his little party, down the Bellows Valley to the Ruggles River, an actual stream of clear-running water, alive with the finest of salmon trout. Adopting the Eskimo methods, he fished for these speckled beauties with joyful success. Here he rounded up and shot the herd of musk-oxen, and here he bagged his caribou. He was in a hunter’s paradise and made no haste to return, but crossed overland to Discovery Harbor and the barn-like structure of Fort Conger, the headquarters of General Greely’s “Lady Franklin Bay Expedition” of 1882⁠–⁠1883. Professor MacMillan was on his way to Fort Conger and it was with much surprise, on arriving there, that he found that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goodsell had reached it an hour before him. It was an unexpected meeting and quite a pleasure to the Professor to find the Doctor there, ready to offer him the hospitality of the fort.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goodsell returned to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> on June 15, with a load of geological, zoological, and botanical specimens almost as heavy as the loads of meat and skins he brought in. He was an ardent scientist, and viewed nearly every situation and object from the viewpoint of the scientist. Nothing escaped him; a peculiar form of rock or plant, the different features of the animal life, all received his close and eager attention, and he had the faculty of imparting his knowledge to others, like the born teacher that he was. He evinced an eager interest in the Eskimos and got along famously with them.</p>
			<p>His physical equipment was the finest; a giant in stature and strength, but withal the gentlest of men having an even, mellow disposition that never was ruffled. In the field the previous spring he had accompanied the expedition beyond the “Big Lead” to 84° 29′, and with the strength of his broad shoulders he had pickaxed the way.</p>
			<p>On account of his calm, quiet manner I had hesitated to form an opinion of him at first, but you can rest assured this was a “Tenderfoot” who made good.</p>
			<p>During this time I left the ship on short hunting trips, but I was never away from the ship for more than ten or twelve hours.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>On July 1 quite a lead was opened in the channel south from Cape Sheridan to Cape Rawson. The ice was slowly moving southward, and the prospects for freeing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> and getting her started on her homeward way were commencing to brighten. The following day a new lead opened much nearer shore, and on July 3 the Eskimos, who had been out hunting, returned from Black Cliff Bay, without game, but with the good news that as far south as Dumb Bell Bay there stretched a lead of open water. July 4, a new lead opened very close to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i>. The spring tides, with a strong southerly wind, had set in so very much earlier, three years before, that on July 4, 1906, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> had been entirely free of ice, with clear, open water for quite a distance to the south; but this year the ship was still completely packed in the ice, and furthermore she was listed at the same angle as during the winter.</p>
			<p>On July 5, I was detailed to help Gushue repair the more or less damaged whaleboats. The heavy and solidly packed snow of the winter had stove them in. On July 6, the anniversary of our departure from New York a year before, the greater part of the day was spent in pumping water from the top of a heavy floeberg into the ship’s boilers. This work was not completed until the morning of the 7th, when the fires were started. Due to the cold, the process of getting up steam was slow work. The ice had been breaking up daily, new leads were noticed, and on this day, July 7, a new lead opened at a distance of fifty yards from the ship, and open water stretched as far south as the eye could see. All hands were put to work reloading the supplies that had been placed on shore the fall previous, for it was easy to see that the time for departure was at hand.</p>
			<p>With the boilers in order, an attempt was made to revolve the shaft, but the propeller was too securely frozen in the ice to move, and so Captain Bartlett got out the dynamite and succeeded in freeing the bronze blades.</p>
			<p>From the 10th of July to the 13th, a fierce storm raged, clouds of freeing spray broke over the ship, incasing her in a coat of icy mail, and the tempest forced all of the ice out of the lower end of the channel and beyond as far as the eye could see, but the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> still remained surrounded by ice.</p>
			<p>The morning of the 15th, a smart breeze from the northeast was blowing, and proved of valuable assistance to us, for it caused the huge blocks of ice that were surrounding the ship to loosen their hold, and for the first time since October, 1908, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roosevelt</i> righted herself to an even keel.</p>
			<p>By this time all of our supplies had been loaded and stored, and from the crow’s-nest a stretch of open water could be seen as far as Cape Rawson. From there to Cape Union the ice was packed solid.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
